Editorial review: Document scroll-triggered animations (#43158)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/reference/properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range-end/index.md

timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: exit;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: entry 100%;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 600px;

/* Multiple range end values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end:
  contain,
  entry 100%;

/* Global values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: inherit;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: initial;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert-layer;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: unset;
```

The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` shorthand property is specified as one or more values, separated by commas.

### Values

- `normal`
  - : Represents the end of the timeline. This is the default value.
- {{cssxref("length-percentage")}}
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.
- {{cssxref("timeline-range-name")}}
  - : Specifies a named timeline range within the overall timeline. The range starts at `0%`.
- `<timeline-range-name>` `<length-percentage>`
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.

## Description

> When creating [CSS scroll-triggered animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations), the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property can be set on the trigger element to explicitly define the end of the trigger's **activation range**. Read the linked guide and the [`timeline-trigger-activation-range` description](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range#description) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating [CSS scroll-triggered animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations), the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property can be used to explicitly define the end of the trigger's **activation range**. Read the linked guide and the [`timeline-trigger-activation-range` description](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range#description) for more information.
```

Allowed values for the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property are:

- `normal`
- A `<length-percentage>`
- A `<timeline-range-name>`
- A `<timeline-range-name>` and a `<length-percentage>` separated by a space.

If the `<timeline-range-name>` value does not include a `<length-percentage>`, the percentage defaults to `100%`.

> The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end`, along with the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} property, can both be set in a single declaration using the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand.

Reviewer: This shorthand does not exist ([yet](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/13608)).

```suggestion
```

---
title: timeline-trigger-activation-range-end CSS property
short-title: timeline-trigger-activation-range-end
slug: Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range-end
page-type: css-property
status:
  - experimental
browser-compat: css.properties.timeline-trigger-activation-range-end
sidebar: cssref
---

{{SeeCompatTable}}

The **`timeline-trigger-activation-range-end`** [CSS](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS) property specifies the end point of a [scroll-triggered animation](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations) trigger's activation range.

## Syntax

```css
/* Keyword or <length-percentage> */

> timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: normal;

Reviewer 2: let's break apart: put normal under a keyword -only header, and vals under a <length-percentage> offset header

clarification: 
Different sections include:
keywords
length-percentage
timeline-range name
TRN with LP
multiple values
globle

Author: I've gone through all the property ref pages in this PR and updated the structure to be as close to this as possible.

timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: 80%;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: 400px;

> /* Named timeline range value */

Author: updated on all pages on which it appears

timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: exit;

> timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: entry 100%;

Author: ok, done, on all same-structured pages

timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 600px;

/* Multiple range end values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end:
  contain,
  entry 100%;

/* Global values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: inherit;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: initial;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert-layer;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: unset;
```

The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property is specified as one or more values, separated by commas.

### Values

- `normal`

>   - : Represents the end of the timeline. This is the default value.

Author: Yup, `cover` is the default. I'll update this to make it explicit.

- {{cssxref("length-percentage")}}

>   - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.

Author: Good question. I think it is relative to the attachment range for that particular timeline range, in the same way as regular animation timelines. Worth linking to your article for the details on this, maybe?

>   - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.

Reviewer 2: any time a percentage is listed as a valid value we need to state what the percent is relative to. we can link, but we need to include it here as text.

(applies to end, start, shorthand, etc.)

>   - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.

Reviewer: In this case the `<length-percentage>` refers to a percentage of the full range of the timeline. For `ScrollTimeline`s that’s the `scroll` range. For `ViewTimeline`s that is the `cover` range.

_[(Spec link](https://drafts.csswg.org/scroll-animations-1/#scroll-driven-attachment:~:text=is%201)%20accordingly.-,Values%20have%20the%20following%20meanings%3A,-normal))_

- {{cssxref("timeline-range-name")}}

>   - : Specifies a named timeline range within the overall timeline. The range starts at `0%`.

Author: removed, on each page it appears on.

- `<timeline-range-name>` `<length-percentage>`

>   - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.

Author: See previous comment on this subject.

>   - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.

Reviewer: In this case the `<length-percentage>` refers to a percentage of the `<timeline-range-name>` that was used. So the wording seems correct.

## Description

> When creating [CSS scroll-triggered animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations), the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property can be used to explicitly define the end of the trigger's **activation range**. Read the linked guide and the [`timeline-trigger-activation-range` description](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range#description) for more information.

Author: I don't think I need to explain what scroll-triggered animations and the activation range are on this page. That's the whole point of the links. I've updated the structure of this intro on each of the four start/end pages to link the active range/activation range terms and remove the "See the..." line from below, as it is a bit repetitious and awkward.

Allowed values for the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property are:

- `normal`
- A `<length-percentage>`
- A `<timeline-range-name>`

> - A `<timeline-range-name>` and a `<length-percentage>` separated by a space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `<timeline-range-name>` and a `<length-percentage>`, separated by a space.
```

If the `<timeline-range-name>` value does not include a `<length-percentage>`, the percentage defaults to `100%`.

> The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end`, along with the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} property, can both be set in a single declaration using the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand.

Author: I've fixed this on all four pages using this structure.

### Specifying multiple range end values

When multiple values are specified in a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property, they are distributed between the specified {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} values in the same fashion as multiple {{cssxref("animation")}} values are distributed (see [Setting multiple animation property values](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animations/Using#setting_multiple_animation_property_values)).

> If multiple `timeline-trigger-name` values are set, but only a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value is set, the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` will apply to all the `timeline-trigger-name`s. If two `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` values are set, they will cycle between the `timeline-trigger-name`s until all of them have a `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value set. And so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When multiple values are specified in a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property, they are distributed between the specified {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} values in the same fashion as other [multiple animation property values are set](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animations/Using#setting_multiple_animation_property_values): If multiple `timeline-trigger-name` values are set, but only a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value is set, the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` will apply to all the `timeline-trigger-name`s. If two `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` values are set, they will cycle between the `timeline-trigger-name`s until all of them have a `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value set. And so on.
```

Author: I've used the first part of your wording change here, but I've fixed the rest of it slightly differently, as I didn't want one giant paragraph.

Updated on all relevant pages.

For example, consider these declarations:

```css
timeline-trigger-name: --my-trigger, --my-other-trigger, --another-trigger;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end:
  cover,
  entry 100%;
```

> In this case, the first name will use the `cover` range end, and the second name will use the `entry 100%` range end. The third name will cycle back to using the `cover` range end again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, `--my-trigger` will use the `cover` range end and `--my-other-trigger` will use the `entry 100%` range end. As there are three names but only two range ends, the range ends are cycled, so the third trigger name,  `--another-trigger` will use the `cover` range end.
```

Author: Updated on all pages that use that same structure.

> In this case, the first name will use the `cover` range end, and the second name will use the `entry 100%` range end. The third name will cycle back to using the `cover` range end again.

Reviewer 2: I actually think it would be easier to understand if we change the names of the triggers to first, second, and third, and go with:

```suggestion
In this case, as there are three names but only two range ends, the range ends are cycled. Every odd numbered name will use the first range end and every even name will use the second one. So the first and third trigger names,  `--first-trigger` and `--third-trigger` will use the `cover` range end and the `--second-trigger` will use the `entry 100%` range end. Had we included a fourth trigger, it would also use the `entry 100%` range end.
```

Author: No, I think your previous suggestion was perfectly understandable. This is overthinking it.

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

### Basic usage

In this example, we show how to create a basic scroll-triggered animation with a custom activation range end value.

#### HTML

> Our markup contains two {{htmlelement("div")}} elements, plus some basic text content to cause the page to scroll. We have hidden the text content for brevity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our markup contains two {{htmlelement("div")}} elements, plus some basic text content to overflow the viewport and cause the page to scroll. We have hidden the text content for brevity.
```
this is super pedantic, but we don't know where this content might land or if people realize it's an iframe and therefore a page.

Author: I don't see how this improves things. It seems like an unnecessary detail to me.

Reviewer 2: It clarifies things when people might not realize it's an iframe and not a div.
scrollport may work better than viewport, but since we're saying page, i suggested viewport instead of scrollport.

Reviewer 2: alternatives:
```suggestion
Our markup contains two {{htmlelement("div")}} elements, plus some basic text content to create a scrollport. We have hidden the text content for brevity.
```
i preferred my first suggestion. It's pedantic, but a lot of text causes overflow not scrolling.

Reviewer 2: you missed this one

</p>

<p>
  Fusce dictum ex quis ipsum consectetur placerat. Cras sed lectus ex. Quisque
  purus dolor, vulputate ac mi eget, commodo varius odio. Suspendisse faucibus
  ipsum vel libero finibus, in placerat nibh congue. Sed iaculis, metus et
  euismod posuere, mi diam vestibulum felis, ac vulputate eros ipsum id justo.
  Etiam a tincidunt purus. Maecenas semper sed enim at blandit. Aenean ut
  sagittis lorem, eget gravida purus. Phasellus eleifend, lectus nec pulvinar
  facilisis, dui dolor feugiat odio, iaculis tempor felis est non tortor. In
  suscipit lorem efficitur molestie tempus. Integer sit amet neque et risus
  iaculis sodales sed eget diam. Quisque sodales nunc sapien, vitae lacinia ex
  luctus quis. Maecenas scelerisque scelerisque elit eu consequat. Etiam ac
  tristique tellus, sed tincidunt velit.
</p>
```

#### CSS

The `.animated` {{htmlelement("div")}} element has an `animation` applied that rotates it. We set an {{cssxref("animation-trigger")}} value on it that references a trigger name of `--t`; we also specify two {{cssxref("animation-action")}} values — `play` and `pause` — which specify that the animation will play on activation, and pause on deactivation.

> The `.trigger` `<div>` element creates the animated `<div>`'s trigger using:

Reviewer 2: break the css code block and explanation in two, putting the `.animated` code before this section ( this section may be overwhelming for those seeking "basic usage".)

Author: Breaking it into two is a good call. I've done this for all the basic usage examples, across all pages.

Author: (This code has quite a few things to explain, so you're not going to get much more basic than this.)

- A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} value of `--t`, which is equal to the identifier referenced in the animated `<div>`'s `animation-trigger` property value, associating the two together.
- A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}} value of [`view()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/animation-timeline/view), which sets the timeline trigger as a view progress timeline, and the element providing the timeline trigger as the nearest scrolling ancestor element.

> - A `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` of `contain 60%`, which sets the trigger's activation range end point to 60% of the way through the `contain` range (when the tracked element has scrolled a little over half way through the viewport in either direction). The {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} value defaults to 0% of the way through the `cover` range, meaning that the animation will start when the tracked element has started to enter the viewport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` of `contain 60%`, which sets the trigger's activation range end point to 60% of the way through the `contain` range (when the tracked element has scrolled a little over half way through the viewport in either direction). The {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} value defaults to `0%` of the way through the `cover` range, meaning that the animation will start when the tracked element start edge enters into the viewport via the scrollport's end edge.
```
or something like that

Author: Done. I've code fonted the units and updated similar sections with similar language on all pages.

> ```css hidden live-sample___basic-example live-sample___compare-multiple-values

Reviewer 2: put this entire code block in a @layer and move to the end, so if someone hits "play" they get the important CSS first.

Author: This will be a huge amount of effort to fix across all pages, for only marginal gain, if any. Plus it makes the source harder to understand when coming back to edit it.

body {
  width: 80%;
  margin: 0 auto;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  font-size: 1.3rem;
}

div {
  height: 100px;
  border: 5px solid black;
}

.animated {
  width: 100px;
  background: orange;
}

.trigger {
  background: wheat;
}

@supports not (timeline-trigger-name: --t) {
  body::before {
    font-family: sans-serif;
    font-size: 1.3rem;
    content: "Your browser does not support scroll-triggered animations.";
    background-color: wheat;
    position: fixed;
    left: 0;
    right: 0;
    top: 40%;
    text-align: center;
    padding: 1rem 0;
    z-index: 1;
  }
}
```

```css live-sample___basic-example
div.animated {

>   animation: rotate 3s infinite linear both;

Reviewer 2: in FF, this will rotate infinitely, as the animation property is supported, and there is an animation duration. no trigger necessary.
The two actions, `play` and `pause` are not impacted by fill-mode, and, 
if the animation is infinite, it will rotate infinitely, with no delay, so animation-fill-mode is not relevant. This should be mentioned in the "no support" content.

Author: There is an error here, which is that fill-mode is not needed for animations using the play and pause actions. So I can happily just delete both from all such examples, and then hopefully not have to add a bunch of explanation to the not-supported boxes.

I've done this on all such examples, across all pages.

  animation-trigger: --t play pause;
}

div.trigger {
  timeline-trigger-name: --t;
  timeline-trigger-source: view();
  timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 60%;
}
```

> Next, we give the animated `<div>` a {{cssxref("position")}} of `fixed`, positioning it near the top-left of the viewport so that we can easily see when its animation starts and stops.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we give the animated `<div>` a {{cssxref("position")}} of `fixed`, positioning it near the top-left of the viewport so we can see when its animation starts and stops.
```

Author: Same change made across several pages

```css live-sample___basic-example live-sample___compare-multiple-values
div.animated {
  position: fixed;
  top: 25px;
  left: 25px;
}
```

Finally, we define the {{cssxref("@keyframes")}} for the `rotate` animation:

```css live-sample___basic-example live-sample___compare-multiple-values
@keyframes rotate {
  from {
    rotate: 0deg;
  }

  to {
    rotate: 360deg;
  }
}
```

#### Result

> The rendered result looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed from several pages.

{{EmbedLiveSample("basic-example", "100%", "240")}}

> Try scrolling the content up. When the tracked `<div>` starts to enter the viewport, the animation will play; when the tracked `<div>` has scrolled a little over half-way up the viewport, the animation will pause.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try scrolling the content up. The tracked `<div>` plays as it enters the viewport, pausing when the tracked `<div>` has scrolled 60% of the way up the viewport.
```

Author: Updated; I've made similar updates on several other pages.

## Specifications

{{Specifications}}

## Browser compatibility

{{Compat}}

## See also

- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}}
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand property

> - {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}}, {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}}, and {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}}
> - {{cssxref("timeline-trigger")}} shorthand property

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger")}} properties: {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}}, {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}}, {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}}
```

Author: I disagree with this. I think it's useful to point out explicitly that it's a shorthand property and keep it on a separate line, and it's pretty obvious what the related longhand properties are by name.

Reviewer 2: we should be consistent across MDN, but we're not. I see both. We can let the powers decide then globally change in one direction or the other.

Reviewer 2: created https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/44120

For example, if multiple `timeline-trigger-name` values are set, but only a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value is set, the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` will apply to all the `timeline-trigger-name`s. If two `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` values are set, they will cycle between the `timeline-trigger-name`s until all of them have a `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value set. And so on.

Consider these declarations:

```css
timeline-trigger-name: --my-trigger, --my-other-trigger, --another-trigger;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end:
  cover,
  entry 100%;
```

In this case, `--my-trigger` will use the `cover` range end and `--my-other-trigger` will use the `entry 100%` range end. As there are three names but only two range ends, the range ends are cycled, so the third trigger name, `--another-trigger`, will use the `cover` range end.

## Formal definition

{{cssinfo}}

## Formal syntax

{{csssyntax}}

## Examples

### Basic usage

In this example, we inset the end of a scroll-triggered animation trigger's activation range by setting a custom `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` value.

#### HTML

> Our markup contains two {{htmlelement("div")}} elements, plus some basic text content to cause the page to scroll. We have hidden the text content for brevity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our markup contains two {{htmlelement("div")}} elements, plus some basic text content to cause the content to overflow the page, creating a scroll container. We have hidden the text content for brevity.
```

Author: I don't think this update is necessary. What is already there works well for describing the markup, and the suggestion is overly precise, which makes the text harder to digest.

```

The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property is specified as one or more values, separated by commas.

### Values

- `normal`
  - : Represents the end of the `cover` timeline. This is the default value.
- {{cssxref("length-percentage")}}
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.
- {{cssxref("timeline-range-name")}}
  - : Specifies a named timeline range within the overall timeline.
- `<timeline-range-name>` `<length-percentage>`
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.

## Description

When creating [CSS scroll-triggered animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations), the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property can be used to explicitly define the end of the trigger's [activation range](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/timeline-trigger-activation-range#description).

Allowed values for the `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property are:

- `normal`
- A `<length-percentage>`
- A `<timeline-range-name>`
- A `<timeline-range-name>` and a `<length-percentage>`, separated by a space.

> If the `<timeline-range-name>` value does not include a `<length-percentage>`, the percentage defaults to `100%`.

Reviewer 2: maybe
```suggestion
If the `<timeline-range-name>` value does not include a `<length-percentage>`, it defaults to `100%` of the entire named range.
```

Author: This is pretty good. I ended up adding a sentence about the default timeline, too:

> If the `<timeline-range-name>` value does not include a `<length-percentage>`, it defaults to `100%` of the named timeline range. If a `<timeline-range-name>` is not included, the timeline range defaults to [`cover`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Values/timeline-range-name#cover).

> The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` and {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} properties can both be set in a single declaration using the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` and {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} properties can also be set using the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand.
```

alternatively, i've seen this in the intro section on MDN docs as 
"The `X` can also be set as part of the {{cssxref("Y")}} shorthand property."

Author: I like the change you've suggested. Implemented on all relevant property pages (most of these comments are relevant to the `*-active-*` pages, too.)

### Specifying multiple range end values

> When multiple values are specified in a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property, they are distributed between the specified {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} values in the same fashion as other [multiple animation property values are set](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animations/Using#setting_multiple_animation_property_values).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When multiple, comma-separated values are specified in a single `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property, they are distributed between the specified {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} values in the same fashion as other [multiple animation property values are set](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animations/Using#setting_multiple_animation_property_values).
```

i think we can get rid of the h3 and the rest of this section, as you link to instructions.

Author: I very nearly did just what you suggested, but then I included a small example to make it clear what properties are involved. I thought that if I just provided that link, it might mislead people into thinking that these values are distributed relative to `animation*` properties, which is not the case.

I'm implementing your suggestion on all pages, but I'm leaving the rest of the section so you can consider my above comment. If afterwards you still feel strongly that we should cut these sections down, we can revisit this later.

- A `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` of `contain 60%`, which sets the trigger's activation range end point to `60%` of the way through the `contain` range (when the tracked element has scrolled a little over half way through the viewport in either direction). The {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} value defaults to `0%` of the way through the `cover` range, meaning that the animation will start when the tracked element start edge enters into the viewport via the scrollport's end edge.

```css live-sample___basic-example
div.trigger {
  timeline-trigger-name: --t;
  timeline-trigger-source: view();
  timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 60%;
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___basic-example
@supports not (timeline-trigger-name: --t) {
  body::before {
    content: "Your browser does not support scroll-triggered animations.";
    background-color: wheat;
    padding: 1rem 0;
    text-align: center;
    padding: 1rem 0;

    z-index: 1;
    position: fixed;
    inset: 40% 0 auto;
  }
}
```

#### Result

{{EmbedLiveSample("basic-example", "100%", "240")}}

> Try scrolling the content up. The tracked `<div>` plays as it enters the viewport, pausing when the tracked `<div>` has scrolled `60%` of the way up the viewport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try scrolling the content up and down. The animation plays from when the trigger `<div>` is first visible at the bottom of the scrollport, pausing when the trigger is scrolled `60%` of the way up the viewport, or `contain` named timeline.
```

Author: updated

timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: exit;

/* Named timeline range plus offset */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: entry 100%;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 600px;

/* Multiple range end values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end:
  contain,
  entry 100%;

/* Global values */
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: inherit;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: initial;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: revert-layer;
timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: unset;
```

The `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` property is specified as one or more values, separated by commas.

### Values

- `normal`
  - : Represents the end of the `cover` timeline. This is the default value.
- {{cssxref("length-percentage")}}
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.
- {{cssxref("timeline-range-name")}}
  - : Specifies a named timeline range within the overall timeline.
- `<timeline-range-name>` `<length-percentage>`
  - : Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.

> Percentages are relative to the length of the named timeline range if one is specified, or the entire timeline if not.

Reviewer 2: We can make it more concise:

```suggestion
  - : Specifies a length or a percentage relative to the length of the timeline range, measured from the beginning of the specified named timeline range.
```
everywhere.

Author: No, because the "Percentages are relative..." sentence applies to two DLs — this one, and the one for `<length-percentage>` on its own.

Reviewer 2: That's a really important point. We need to update both, with helpful information for that value type. The suggested edit still stands, or maybe:

```suggestion
  - : Specifies a length or a percentage relative to the length of the specified named timeline range, measured from the beginning of the named range.
```

But we also need to update the length-percent value text. 

We need to get a better understanding from the spec authors what the "entire timeline" is. 
The spec reads: 
"relative to the specified named timeline range if one was specified, else to the entire timeline"
(which is also what you wrote)
but that doesn't fully explain it. Omitting the range name is the same as setting the `normal <length-percentage>`. We need to say want normal means. 
I think it sets the timeline range to `normal`, which i think is `cover`. We need to make sure that's accurate, then say it. 

```
Specifies a length or percentage value measured from the beginning of the timeline.
```

maybe

```
Specifies a length value or percentage value relative to the entire [normal or contain] timeline, measured from the beginning of the [normal or contain] timeline.
```

i still don't fully understanding if "normal" is "cover". @bramus can you help?

Reviewer 2: If @bramus is unavailable, do you by any chance know Robert Flack or David Awogbemila? Or even (Yehonatan Daniv? 

otherwise, every time we mention default we need to say something to the effect of "the value defaults to `normal`, which resolves to `cover`" . So much easier to just write "default of `cover`", but not sure if that is correct, which i assume the spec authors would know ;)

Reviewer: _(For some reason I did not get notified of these pings. Thanks @estelle for the extra ping on Bsky)_

As replied [on Bsky](https://bsky.app/profile/bram.us/post/3mn7rt2suzk2s): 

> For `ScrollTimeline`-driven animations the `normal` shorthand expands to an `animation-range-start` of `0%` and `animation-range-end` of `100%`.
> 
> For `ViewTimeline`-driven animations, it means `cover 0% cover 100%` indeed

So there is a good reason to use `normal` here :)

Author: Thanks for the details, @bramus. I've updated all the `*range*` pages to represent this info and try to clean things up a bit. I've also made some updates to the main guide to improve accuracy in light of this new info.

  euismod posuere, mi diam vestibulum felis, ac vulputate eros ipsum id justo.
  Etiam a tincidunt purus. Maecenas semper sed enim at blandit. Aenean ut
  sagittis lorem, eget gravida purus. Phasellus eleifend, lectus nec pulvinar
  facilisis, dui dolor feugiat odio, iaculis tempor felis est non tortor. In
  suscipit lorem efficitur molestie tempus. Integer sit amet neque et risus
  iaculis sodales sed eget diam. Quisque sodales nunc sapien, vitae lacinia ex
  luctus quis. Maecenas scelerisque scelerisque elit eu consequat. Etiam ac
  tristique tellus, sed tincidunt velit.
</p>
```

#### CSS

We start by giving the `.animated` `<div>` element a {{cssxref("position")}} of `fixed`, positioning it near the top-left of the viewport so we can see when its animation starts and stops.

```css hidden live-sample___basic-example
body {
  width: 80%;
  margin: 0 auto;
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
  font-size: 1.3rem;
}

div {
  height: 100px;
  border: 5px solid black;
}

.animated {
  width: 100px;
  background: orange;
}

.trigger {
  background: wheat;
}
```

```css live-sample___basic-example
div.animated {
  position: fixed;
  top: 25px;
  left: 25px;
}
```

> Next, we define the {{cssxref("@keyframes")}} for a `rotate` animation we will apply below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, we define the {{cssxref("@keyframes")}} for a `rotate` animation we will apply later:
```
Per MDN guidelines, please avoid "below" and "above" (4 occurrences)

Author: I've done a mass search and replace for "above" and "below" throughout the entire PR.

```css live-sample___basic-example
@keyframes rotate {
  from {
    rotate: 0deg;
  }

  to {
    rotate: 360deg;
  }
}
```

> The `.animated` `<div>` has the `rotate` `animation` applied. We then set an {{cssxref("animation-trigger")}} value on it that references a trigger name of `--t`; we also specify two {{cssxref("animation-action")}} values — `play` and `pause` — which specify that the animation will play on activation, and pause on deactivation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The apply the `rotate` `animation` to the `.animated` `<div>`, using the {{cssxref("animation")}} shorthand to apply `infinite` iterations. We then set an {{cssxref("animation-trigger")}} value on it that references a trigger name of `--t`, specifying two {{cssxref("animation-action")}} values — `play` and `pause` — which set the animation to play on activation, and pause on deactivation.
```

Author: Updated everywhere.

```css live-sample___basic-example
div.animated {
  animation: rotate 3s infinite linear;
  animation-trigger: --t play pause;
}
```

> The `.trigger` `<div>` element creates the animated `<div>`'s trigger using:

Reviewer 2: it doesn't create the trigger, it is the trigger.

Author: No. The element itself is not the trigger. Strictly speaking, the trigger is the occurrence of the tracked element entering or leaving the activation range (or leaving the active range, if one is specified). This section of the spec is quite helpful here: https://drafts.csswg.org/animation-triggers-1/#triggers. 

This is pretty bloody complicated to explain, so I glossed over it a bit. I'm not sure if you think something explicit needs adding to the guide to make it clearer.

Reviewer 2: maybe this can reduce confusion (which i obviously had)

```suggestion
The `.trigger` `<div>` element creates triggers for the animated `<div>`'s using:
```

possibly "creates a trigger", singular, but since there is activation and deactivation, i think plural is more accurate

- A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}} value of [`view()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/animation-timeline/view), which sets the timeline trigger as a view progress timeline, and the element providing the timeline trigger as the nearest scrolling ancestor element.
- A `timeline-trigger-activation-range-end` of `contain 60%`, which sets the trigger's activation range end point to `60%` of the way through the `contain` range (when the tracked element has scrolled a little over half way through the viewport in either direction). The {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}} value defaults to `0%` of the way through the `cover` range, meaning that the animation will start when the tracked element start edge enters into the viewport via the scrollport's end edge.

```css live-sample___basic-example
div.trigger {
  timeline-trigger-name: --t;
  timeline-trigger-source: view();
  timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 60%;
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___basic-example
@supports not (timeline-trigger-name: --t) {
  body::before {

>     content: "Your browser does not support scroll-triggered animations.";

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@supports not (timeline-trigger-activation-range-end: contain 60% {
  body::before {
    content: "Your browser does not support the timeline-trigger-activation-range-end property.";
```
The support statement on property pages should test the property and inform the user that the property is not supported (rather than the general spec or feature)
in all property cases.
similar for data-type, should use the data-type, selector use the selector, value, etc.

Author: OK, done, on all pages in the PR.

    background-color: wheat;
    padding: 1rem 0;
    text-align: center;
    padding: 1rem 0;

    z-index: 1;
    position: fixed;
    inset: 40% 0 auto;
  }
}
```

#### Result

{{EmbedLiveSample("basic-example", "100%", "240")}}

> Try scrolling the content up and down. The animation plays when the trigger `<div>` first becomes visible at the bottom of the scrollport and pauses when the trigger has scrolled `60%` of the way up the scrollport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Try scrolling the content up and down. The animation plays when the trigger `<div>` first becomes visible at the bottom of the scrollport and pauses when the trigger has scrolled `60%` of the way up the timeline range.
```
yes, it's the same in this case, but don't want people to thing percents are relative to the scrollport

Author: OK, changed.

## Specifications

{{Specifications}}

## Browser compatibility

{{Compat}}

## See also

- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range-start")}}
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} shorthand property
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}}, {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}}, and {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}}
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger")}} shorthand property

> - [Using CSS scroll-triggered animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations)

Reviewer 2: add the trigger module before the animation module. True for all reference pages created in this PR

Author: Done.
